The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astronomical Instruments and Accessories, by 
Wm. Gaertner & Co.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Astronomical Instruments and Accessories

Author: Wm. Gaertner & Co.

Release Date: December 10, 2008 [EBook #27477]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS ***




Produced by Matthew Rongey, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)











Catalog A. 1908.

ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS
... AND ...
ACCESSORIES.

[Illustration]

WM. GAERTNER & CO.
5345-5349 Lake Ave.
CHICAGO.




Catalog A. 1908.

ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS
... AND ...
ACCESSORIES.

[Illustration]

WM. GAERTNER & CO.
5345-5349 Lake Ave.
CHICAGO.




Notice.


This catalogue supersedes former editions.

The prices given in this catalogue are net and do not include packing which
will be charged at cost.

To avoid mistakes and delays when ordering please give catalogue number and
shipping instructions.

Most of the instruments listed in this catalogue are constructed to order
only but the smaller sizes of telescopes with accessories, chronographs,
simpler measuring machines, etc., are usually kept in stock.

The apparatus listed in this catalogue is of our own manufacture, excepting
the astronomical regulator clocks, which we have listed for the convenience
of our customers.

All orders will be filled as promptly as possible with due regard to
thorough workmanship and efficient inspection.

Everything that leaves our establishment is carefully tested and inspected
and we can guarantee our apparatus to be, in every respect, fully as
represented. Any piece, which does not come up to the most exacting
requirements will always be promptly replaced within the shortest possible
time.

We shall be glad to satisfy any special requirements of our customers and
will make any desired alterations and additions on the standard designs.




Introduction.


In the following pages we have endeavored to give to our customers an idea
of the line of astronomical instruments of the latest and most improved
types which we have constructed for some of the leading observatories as
mentioned in the text. We feel that this series of illustrations may not
only be of general interest, but also of service in helping to determine
further developments of modern astronomical and astrophysical equipment. We
have not thought it advisable to describe in detail the various instruments
of precision, which we have been called upon to construct from time to time
for the scientists in the astronomical as well as other branches of science
during the last ten years. As a rule every astronomer is interested in some
special line of research, which for a successful investigation requires a
special adaptation of the instrument he proposes to use, and in such cases
we are confident we can fill the requirements and shall be happy to
correspond with interested parties. We are in position to undertake the
design of special apparatus and can furnish sketches and estimates in
accordance with the suggestions of the customer on short notice in such
cases, where the importance of the prospective business will warrant it.
Among the various instruments which we have built, but which are not
included in this catalogue, we wish to mention, spectroheliographs,
planetary cameras, photographic plate holders, domes for observatories,
etc.

The optical parts which we furnish are of the highest degree of excellence
and are made for us by several of the most reliable firms in this line.

Mr. O. L. Petitdidier is closely located to our works, and during the last
ten years has supplied most of our objectives, etc.

It is and has been the aim of our firm to produce apparatus of the highest
grade and the constant growth of our business is a mute but eloquent
testimonial that our efforts have been appreciated by our customers.

We are glad to acknowledge our indebtedness to many of the foremost
astronomers, who have greatly assisted us by suggestions as to their
particular requirements, and by supplying certain of the photographs here
reproduced.

We take this opportunity to thank our customers for the favors rendered us
in the past, and trust that in the future these mutually pleasant relations
may be renewed.

[Illustration: A 101]

#A101. Alt-Azimuth Mounting# on strong hardwood tripod. The vertical and
horizontal axis have large bearing surfaces, assuring stability and
steadiness of motion. All parts excepting the tripod head are made of brass
and are nicely finished. The telescope is fitted with long rack and pinion
motion. Three celestial eye pieces are included. Price with 2½"
telescope                                                          #$90.00#

#A102.# The same as above with 3" telescope. Price                #$110.00#

#A103.# The same as above with 3½" telescope. Price               #$140.00#

#A104.# The same as above with 4" telescope. Price                #$200.00#

#Note.#--All our astronomical telescope have objectives of the standard
focal length (focus = to about 15 times diameter of aperture). The
objective is mounted in the most approved manner and is provided with
adjustment for collimation.

#Note.#--For accessories to these telescopes see page 11.

[Illustration: A 110]

#A110. Universal Equatorial Mounting.# This form of mounting can be used
equally well for celestial and terrestrial observations. The mounting is
made to swivel on the tripod head, in order to set the instrument in the
meridian. The polar axis can be set at any latitude and a graduated arc
gives the exact position. The instrument is set level by means of two small
levels attached to the tripod top. The polar axis is fitted with worm wheel
and worm for slow motion. The handle with the universal joint can be
clamped on either side of the worm shaft. Telescope of 3" aperture and
three eye pieces. Price                                           #$165.00#

#A111.# Same as above with 3½" telescope. Price                   #$190.00#

#A112.# Same as above with 4" telescope. Price                    #$250.00#

For accessories see page 11.

[Illustration: A 120]

#A120. Portable Equatorial Mounting with Driving Clock.# This instrument
was designed to meet the demand for portable low priced telescope suitable
for the study of astronomy in the college, high school or for the amateur
astronomer. Every observer and teacher in astronomy will appreciate the
great usefulness of a driving mechanism, which will keep the star in the
field during observation. After several years of experimenting we have
succeeded in constructing a reliable clock which can easily be attached to
our portable telescope mounting.

The instrument is mounted on strong hardwood tripod fitted with iron shoes.
It is attached to the tripod top by a single screw which holds it firmly
and allows adjustment in azimuth. The clock case carrying the bearing for
the polar axis is made to swivel in the base casting, so that the polar
axis may be easily set and firmly clamped at an angle from horizontal to
vertical. A level is fitted to the tripod top and a graduated arc is
fastened to the clock case. If the polar axis is set vertical and the worm
wheel unclamped, the instrument is transformed into an alt-azimuth
mounting. This feature will be found to be a great convenience especially
for terrestrial observations.

Both the polar and declination axes are carefully fitted to their bearings
and carry finding circles. The right ascension circle reads to 5 min., the
declination circle to single degrees. The declination axis is fitted with
clamp screw which is within convenient reach.

The clock has ample power and is enclosed in a heavy case which protects it
from dust and injury. It is driven by two strong springs and will run about
12 hours without rewinding. A lever for starting or stopping is provided.
Motion from clock to polar axis is transmitted by means of a set of bevel
gears and worm and worm wheel. The worm wheel is held by friction to the
polar axis so that the telescope can be moved without loosening any screw
and without affecting the clock. The clock will give steady and accurate
motion to the telescope and with ordinary care it will keep in good repair
for years. A slow motion adjustment independent of the clock is fitted to
the polar axis.

With the instrument are furnished three celestial eye pieces giving a
magnifying power of about 50, 100 and 150 diameters respectively.

The instrument is easily portable, the total weight of a 3" telescope being
about 60 lbs. yet it is made heavy enough, and the material well
distributed to insure strength and steadiness. Workmanship and finish of
the instrument are the best. The brass parts are either lacquered yellow or
bronzed. The iron parts are durably enameled and all exposed steel parts
are nickel-plated.

#A120.# Telescope of 3" aperture. Price                           #$190.00#

#A121.# Telescope of 3½" aperture, the same as above but the bearing parts
made proportionally heavier. Price                                #$240.00#

#A122.# Telescope of 4" aperture. Price                           #$320.00#

For accessories see page 11.

#Note.#--An iron column can be provided for above telescopes in place of of
the tripod, at an extra cost of $20.00.

[Illustration: A 130]




EQUATORIAL MOUNTINGS ON IRON PILLAR WITH DRIVING CLOCK, ETC.


On page 10 is shown an illustration of our standard high grade type of 6
in. equatorial. A description of the same will apply to practically all
larger and smaller sizes.

The pillar is of rectangular cross section and well proportioned. The clock
case is securely fastened to the top of the pillar but with provision for
adjustment in azimuth. The clock has ample driving power, is very carefully
constructed and regulated by friction governor (Design Prof. Young.)
Maintaining gears are provided on the main shaft which allows the winding
of the clock without retarding motion. Worm wheel and worm are carefully
cut, and protected by brass shields. Right ascension and declination
circles have fine graduation on solid silver and coarse finding graduation
on the edge. Electric illumination and magnifying glasses are fitted to the
verniers. The handles for all clamps and slow motions are fastened
conveniently near the eye end of the telescope and are of different shape
so as to distinguish in the dark right ascension and declination. The axes
are of tool steel carefully fitted to their bearings, and on the larger
instruments friction rollers are fitted to the polar axis. The telescope
tube is made of steel, light but strongly constructed. The eye end has long
and heavy rack and pinion motion and the whole can be easily removed.

#Note.#--The fine divided circles are often omitted on smaller equatorials,
as they are not essential, the electrical illumination for the circles is
also left off, and this will amount to a material saving.

#A130. Equatorial Mounting with 5 in. Telescope.# According to above
description with first class objective, and five eye pieces.
Price                                                             #$950.00#

The same instrument without fine circles and electrical illumination.
Price                                                             #$825.00#

#A131. Equatorial Mounting with 6 in. Telescope.#
Complete as A130. Price                                          #$1500.00#

#A132. Equatorial Mounting with 8 in. Telescope.#
Same as above. Price                                             #$2500.00#

#A133. Equatorial Mounting with 9 in. Telescope.#
Same as above. Price                                             #$3300.00#

#A134. Equatorial Mounting with 10 in. Telescope.#
Same as above. Price                                             #$3700.00#

#A135. Equatorial Mounting with 12 in. Telescope.#
Same as above. Price                                             #$5500.00#

#Note.#--We are equipped to construct larger instruments and are glad to
give prices on application.

[Illustration: A 131]

[Illustration]

The above cut shows a driving clock for our standard 6 in. telescope.

We have constructed clocks for a number of larger telescopes among others
the clock for the 24 in. Lowell Refractor.




ACCESSORIES TO TELESCOPES A101 TO A135.

#A140. Finder# fitted to 3" telescope. Price                       #$12.00#

#A141. Finder# fitted to 3½" telescope. Price                      #$15.00#

#A150. Positive Eye Pieces.# (Ramsden), focus 6 mm. to 25 mm.
Price                                                               #$4.50#

#A151. Negative Eye Pieces.# (Huygenian), focus 5 mm. to 25 mm.
Price                                                               #$4.50#

#A152. Diagonal Eye Piece.# The prism of the eye piece has guaranteed
optically plane surfaces and will not affect the definition of the
telescope. Price                                                   #$12.00#

#A153. Terrestrial Eye Piece#, focus 25 mm. Price                  #$12.00#

#A154. Sun Caps#, to fit above eye pieces. Price                    #$1.50#

The outside diameter of all our eye pieces is 1¼" excepting those used in
our Micrometers.

[Illustration: A 201]

#A201. Position Micrometers for 6" to 8" Telescopes.# Circle 15 cm.
diameter, divisions on solid silver, verniers reading to 6 min., slow gear
motion for rotating, electrical illumination, provided with different color
screens. Screw guaranteed of highest accuracy. Price              #$200.00#

#A202. Position Micrometers for 4" to 5" Telescopes.# Similar to above but
rotation by hand and construction somewhat simpler. Price         #$100.00#

[Illustration: A 203]

#A203. Small Position Micrometer for 3" to 4" Telescopes.# Circle reads
to single degrees. Electric illumination. Price                    #$75.00#

[Illustration: A 301]

#Transit Instrument#, with reversing arrangement, illumination with oil or
electric lamp, Filar micrometer with two eye pieces. Weight of axis
balanced by springs and rollers. The circle has a diameter of 150 mm.,
verniers read to 20 seconds. The instrument is mounted on an iron base
plate, which is fitted with azimuth adjustment (not shown in cut).

#A301. Transit# with 2" Telescope. Price                          #$550.00#

#A302. Transit# with 3" Telescope. Price                          #$800.00#

[Illustration: A 401]

#A401. Universal Instrument.# Telescope with objective prism. Vertical
circle has a diameter of 13 cm. is divided to 10 min. and reads by means of
two micrometer microscopes to 10 sec. The telescope is fitted with hard
phosphor bronze bearing rings and is reversible. Aperture of objective is
30 mm. Two eye pieces are furnished giving magnification of 20 and 30
diameters. The prism has absolutely plane surfaces and will not affect the
definition. Striding level reads to 2 sec. The horizontal circle is
protected and reads by means of two verniers to 1 min. The instrument is
packed in a light but strong case. Price complete with tripod     #$420.00#

#Note.#--This instrument was first constructed for Mr. E. de K.
Leffingwell, who has found it very satisfactory for his work in the polar
regions.

[Illustration: A 501]

#A501. Zoellner Astrophotometer.# The instrument is made to attach to the
eye end of the telescope and may be used with any size of refractor or
reflector. An axis parallel to the telescope tube allows the instrument to
rotate as a whole. A clamp is provided to hold it in position. The
artificial star is formed by a small incandescent lamp which is adjustable
in any direction, and in front of which is mounted a small diaphragm. The
color changing device, consisting of Nicol prism and quartz plate, is
fitted with a divided circle reading to single degrees. The circle
revolving with the Nicol prism for changing the intensity of the star, has
a diameter of 14 cm. and reads by means of two verniers to 6 min. A concave
lens is mounted in the path of the artificial star to make the light
diverging at the proper angle and a plane parallel plate is adjustably
fixed in the center of the box in order to throw the light in the eye
piece. An achromatic objective in front of the eye piece brings the images
of the real and artificial star to a focus in the same plane.
Price                                                             #$150.00#

[Illustration: A 601]

[Illustration: A 602]

#A601. Small Spectroscope.# Suitable for telescope from 3 to 6 in.
aperture. The collimator and observing telescope have an aperture of 25
mm., focus of 200 mm. Both are fitted with rack and pinion. The
spectroscope may be used with a grating or a 60 degree prism, and for this
purpose has openings for the telescopes at the proper angles. A position
circle of 75 mm. diameter, reading to degrees, is fitted to the instrument.
The slit has micrometer head.

Price, without grating, but including 60 degree prism              #$75.00#

#Note.#--This spectroscope can also be used on a support for laboratory
work.

#Support# for above spectroscope. Price                             #$4.50#

#A602. Spectroscope# for telescopes from 6 in. to 18 in. aperture and
detailed description on application.

[Illustration: A 701]

#A701. Chronograph# for physical and astronomical work. This chronograph is
designed to meet the demand for a medium sized, well-made and accurate
instrument of this kind and has given very good satisfaction. The cylinder
is 15 cm. in diameter 25 cm. long, driven by strong, carefully made clock
work, fitted with friction governor. Two different speeds for the cylinder
can be obtained by means of change gears. The slow speed of the drum is one
revolution per minute, and at this speed the drum will run for a full hour.
The fast speed is 30 seconds per revolution. The carriage is driven by
means of a screw, the nut of which is made to disengage easily.

Price of the instrument complete with two pens and glass cover    #$225.00#

#A701a. Chronograph#, the same as A701 but with only one pen. The carriage
is so constructed that a second pen can easily be added later. Price with
glass cover                                                       #$195.00#

#Note.#--Every instrument is carefully tested before being sent out and we
can guarantee the speed not to vary over 1-20 second during the full run of
one hour. Large temperature changes will not affect the speed of the clock.
A large number of the chronographs are in use and have given excellent
satisfaction.

[Illustration: A 702]

#A702. Prof. G. W. Hough's Printing Chronograph.# The instrument consists
of two carefully and accurately constructed clock movements, which are
driven by gravity and controlled electrically by the sidereal clock. The
movements revolve three type wheels. One of these turns once per second,
its edge is divided in 50 parts and it is driven by a separate movement.
The second wheel turns once per minute and the third once per hour and they
will print the seconds and minutes, while the first will give the
hundredths of seconds. A strip of paper is carried over these wheels and
moved forward by the same electro-magnet, which operates the printing
hammers. The paper is sufficiently long for 1200 observations including
spacing between records. The operation of the printing hammers is such that
the uniform motion of the type wheel is not disturbed in the act of
printing. The whole instrument is mounted on a heavy slate plate 45 cm. by
60 cm., and protected by a glass cover.

The manipulation of the apparatus is extremely simple and convenient and
the records obtained are perfectly reliable and accurate within about 0.01
of a second. The saving of time and labor by the printing chronograph is
very considerable and the filing of the records very convenient.

This printing chronograph has been in use at the Dearborn Observatory for
about twenty years and during the last five years the following
observatories have been equipped with the instrument: Amherst College
Observatory; Case School of Applied Science, Cleveland; Philadelphia
Observatory; Durham Observatory, Durham, England; Observatory of LaPlatta,
Argentine; and Dominion Observatory, Ottawa, Canada.

Prof. Hough has kindly consented to inspect every chronograph before it
leaves our shop. Price, complete on stand, glass cover, etc.      #$500.00#

[Illustration: A 801]

[Illustration: A 802]

#A801. Laboratory Clock.# This is an eight-day clock; has a movement of the
best workmanship, is driven by two strong springs, and keeps accurate time.
The dial is 12 inches in diameter and has hour, minute and second hands.
Pendulum beats seconds and makes electric contact by means of an adjustable
mercury cup. It is mounted in a hardwood case with glass door.
Price                                                              #$27.00#

#A802. Laboratory Clock.# The same as preceding one, but with better clock
movement, gravity driven. Price                                    #$35.00#

#A803. Regulator Clock.# This clock has a first-class eight day movement
with cut steel pinions. It is fitted with mercury compensation pendulum and
electrical seconds contact. Price                                 #$200.00#

#Note.#--We can furnish free of duty to educational institutions
astronomical precision clocks made by C. Riefler, Germany, and will be
pleased to quote prices to interested parties.

[Illustration: A 1200]

#A1200. Simple Comparator.# (Fig. A1200.) Built up of #Micrometer Slide#
M301 and #Microscope# M101, #with support# M310 #Fitted with Stage#. The
stage is 150 mm. long and provided with clips for holding objects, such as
spectrum photographs, scales, etc., and is fitted with illuminating mirror.
Price                                                              #$45.00#

#A1201. Small Comparator.# The instrument is intended for measuring spectra
photographs, gratings, divided scales, or such objects which can be focused
by the microscope and will allow rapid measurements of the highest possible
accuracy. The measurement depends on the accuracy of the micrometer screw,
which is cut and corrected with great care. The screw has a pitch of .5 mm.
and diameter of 15 mm. The index head attached to the screw is of
considerable diameter so as to allow the direct reading of .001 mm. The
head is divided on solid silver in 500 parts, and carries two rows of
figures indicating the first and second half of the mm. The full mm. are
read by means of a scale in front of the instrument. The bed plate is
heavy, of cast iron, and the guides are carefully scraped true within 0.001
mm. The carriage has a movement of 80 mm., is made of gun metal and fitted
exactly to the guides; it is also provided with a second or top carriage
with 40 mm. motion. The top carriage can be moved by hand and accurately
set by means of a micrometer screw. The microscope is of variable
magnifying power, focused by rack and pinion. Illumination for transparent
objects is given from below by means of a plane mirror. The instrument is
mounted on heavy supports, under an angle to make it convenient for the
observer. The instrument is finished in first-class manner, and the iron
bed plate heavily copper and nickel plated.

The design of this machine was suggested by Prof. Edwin Frost of the Yerkes
Observatory, where a number of these machines have been in constant use
during the last five years. Careful tests have shown the screw accurate
within .0003 of a mm. throughout the full length. Price           #$175.00#

#Note.#--The micrometer on microscope as shown in cut is not furnished with
instrument.

A tangent screw for revolving the eye piece with the spider thread can be
attached at a cost of $5.00.

[Illustration: A 1201]

[Illustration: A 1202]

#A1202. Comparator for Measuring Spectra Photographs, Scales, Etc.# Range
50 cm. The microscope travels on carefully straightened ways, and is moved
by a screw of 1 mm. pitch. The screw head is faced with a silver band and
is divided in 1000 parts. The handle for turning the screw is placed on the
left side of the instrument so as to have the right hand free for recording
readings.

A set of change gears can easily be engaged to give a fast motion to the
carriage. The stage will hold plates from 3 to 8 cm. in width and of 60 cm.
in length. It can be shifted lengthwise for a distance of 25 cm. and is
provided with adjustment for aligning the plates. The whole stage can be
easily removed from the instrument.

The microscope is fitted with variable magnifying power and is of standard
size. Price                                                       #$450.00#

#Note.#--The design of this comparator was suggested by Prof. Humphries,
Director Laboratory of the U. S. Weather Bureau, for whom the first one was
built.

[Illustration: A 1203]

#A1203. Comparator for Star Photographs#, measures in one direction 80 mm.
and under right angle 60 mm. The lower part is constructed similar to our
Comparator A1201. The top slide carries a divided circle for measuring
position angles. The circle is arranged similar to a position micrometer.
It is fitted with quick gear motion and tangent screw and the two verniers
read to 1-100 degree. The microscope has variable magnifying power and is
provided with reversing eye piece. This machine has been furnished for and
is in use at Yerkes, Lick and Kirkwood Observatories. Price       #$365.00#

[Illustration: A 1204]

#A1204. Comparator.# For Plates 8×10 inches. This machine was constructed
in accordance with suggestions given by Dr. Frank Schlesinger, Director of
Allegheny Observatory. The ways are carefully straightened to within 0.002
millimeter. The carriage is moved by two racks and pinions and has a large
handle on each side. Two concentric circles are fitted to the carriage, the
inner circle carries the plate with the film in a fixed plane, no matter
what the thickness of the glass may be. Both circles are provided with
clamps and tangent screws, so that each one may be clamped and adjusted
independently. The outside circle carries four index points 90 degrees
apart. One of these marks is made adjustable. These four marks serve to
turn the plate exactly 90 degrees so as to measure rectangular
coordinates. The guide carrying the measuring microscope is adjusted
exactly at right angles to the ways of the bed plate. The carriage
supporting the microscope is moved by rack and pinion. The microscope is
arranged to tilt, so as to view either the plate or the scale above. The
eye piece is provided with a reversing prism. Measurements are made on the
scale divided in millimeters. The smaller measurements, to 1-4000 of a mm.,
are made by the micrometer. The micrometer is fitted with sliding eye piece
and counter for full revolutions. The scale is not marked in the usual way
with single lines, but each millimeter is marked with a double line. This
double line allows the use of one single spider thread, which is preferable
to use for bisecting the star, and the double line on the scale allows a
clear setting with the single spider thread. The stage is fitted with an
adaptor for holding plates 4×5 inches. Price                      #$450.00#

This machine has been in use during the last years at the Yerkes
Observatory and has been found very convenient and satisfactory in every
way.

A graduated circle can be provided if desirable. Such division on solid
silver, with verniers reading to 1-100 of a degree will increase the cost
$50.00.

#A1205. Comparator#, for plates 4×5 in. of the same design as A1204.
Price                                                             #$300.00#

[Illustration: A 1206]

#A1206. Comparator.# A larger machine of the same design as A1204 with
scale of 45 cm. length, divided in double lines to 0.25 mm., and with two
carriages, one for spectrum plates of 18 in. length and the other with
divided circles for star photographs 12"×14". This instrument was
constructed for the Solar Observatory of the Carnegie Institution at Mount
Wilson, California.

[Illustration: COELOSTAT.

As built for the United States Naval Observatory after design furnished by
Mr. W. W. Dinwiddie.]

[Illustration: ARMILLARY SPHERE.

Built after design of Prof. J. F. Lanneau, Wake Forest College, N. C.]




_NOVEMBER, 1905_

Wm. Gaertner & Co.

Astronomical, physical and physiological Apparatus


5347-5349 LAKE AVENUE CHICAGO

[Illustration]


Spectrometers and Accessories

#Cat. No. L4020 LABORATORY SPECTROMETER.# This instrument is very rigid and
accurate in construction and every part of its design has been carefully
considered. The circle has a diameter of 15 cm. and the two verniers read
to 20 sec. It is fitted with protecting plate which adds greatly to the
value of the instrument if put in the hands of students. The graduation is
on solid silver. The verniers are fitted with adjustable magnifying
glasses, the telescopes have an aperture of 25 mm., focal length of 200 mm.
A horizontal adjustment for the telescope is provided. No provision is
made for radial adjustment, which correction is made before the instrument
is sent out. The slit is accurately constructed; the jaws are of German
silver and it is provided with comparison prism. The eye end of the
observing telescope is of standard size so as to receive our micrometers
M201 or M202, or the Auto Collimating eye piece (Lamont & Abbe) M540. Gauze
eye piece is fitted to the instrument. The prism table and observing
telescope have independent movements and each is provided with clamp and
tangent screw. The prism table can be clamped to any part of the vernier
plate. The prism holder has convenient leveling arrangement and will hold
prism up to 35 mm. in height. The instrument is arranged to receive Fuess
centering apparatus and crystal holder. A 60 degree heavy flint glass prism
of best optical quality is included.

Price                                                                $75.00

#L4020b CAMERA ATTACHMENT# will fit in place of the observing telescope. It
is fitted with long focus objective and standard plate holder 2½"×2½". The
plate holder is provided with swivel for proper focusing of the spectrum.
The slit is so arranged that four exposures can be made on one plate.

Price                                                                $20.00

#Cat. No. L4020c SCALE TUBE.# The third arm of the instrument can be easily
attached and rotated and clamped in any position. It may also be used for
holding a second Collimator.

Price                                                                $20.00

#Cat. No. L4021 STUDENT'S SPECTROMETER.# This instrument is in every
respect similar to our L4020, but some of the higher finish has been
omitted. All the essentials are carefully constructed and the optical parts
are of the best quality. The circle is protected but only one vernier
reading to 30 sec. is fitted to the instrument. The magnifying glass is
omitted.

Price, including prism                                               $60.00

[Illustration]

[Illustration]


TRANSCRIBERS' NOTES

General: Corrections to punctuation have not been individually noted.

General: Inconsistent spelling of catalog/catalogue preserved as in
original.

Page 7: magnifiing corrected to magnifying and celestrial corrected to
celestial.

Page 17: intensisy corrected to intensity.

Page 18: hundreths corrected to hundredths. LaPlatta as in original.

NB The final two pages of the book, on Astronomical, physical and
physiological Apparatus, are in a slightly different format in the
original. Particularly, prices are not in bold. That has been preserved in
this version.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Astronomical Instruments and
Accessories, by Wm. Gaertner & Co.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS ***

***** This file should be named 27477-8.txt or 27477-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/4/7/27477/

Produced by Matthew Rongey, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
